It ain't easy bein' Sisyphus: "a game" by Will Graham-Simpkins

Artist Statement

At first, it was difficult to come up with a concept that wasn't simply retreading what had been done by Pippin. I knew I wanted to make something really dry, though. Rather than work from a pre-established concept, I started at the basics: I made a button that increases a number, and then I made another button that increases the AMOUNT by which that same number increases. My concept had been established.

I am interested in coding because I am interested in game design. What I love most about games is their "feel". Telling stories is fine. Great graphics are great. A fantastic soundtrack can make a game fantastic. But it is the underlying and somewhat esoteric relationship formed by the feedback between input device (like a mouse or controller) and output device (audio+visuals) built on top of what we call "controls" that is the foundation of how a game "feels".

Of course, I do not wish to undermine the importance of storytelling/visuals/audio in terms of how a game feels. Truly, a game's feel is the combination and successful symbiosis of all these when they are bound in a intentionally cohesive way. In order for it to feel good when Mario runs & jumps, it is important to both see and hear those things.

After I had made my two buttons, I had built a foundation upon which I could create a feeling. Rather than take a philosophical approach to retelling the myth of Sisyphus (“The struggle itself is enough to fill a man’s heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy.”), I wanted to recreate what it must FEEL like to be Sisyphus. (Originally, the idea was to create a "Sisyphus's story generator", hence the text and font)

In order to generate strength (to move heavy objects, for example), one must focus that strength, and then manifest it physically. This can be seen as two separate actions that take place, represented by the buttons. However, another factor exists: fatigue. I had both Focusing Strength and Pushing the Rock contribute to an abstract "fatigue" value. Generated from this value is a chance of the rock slipping a random amount every time one of the two actions are made. Additionally, if fatigue surpasses 50%, that random amount is doubled. The rock also slips on its own at regular intervals.

The interplay of these 3 values and how they are implemented in the game forms the foundation of the game's feel. I'm not going to explain in detail how the values affect the feel: simply play for a few minutes and you will know what I mean.

Then came the task of sound. I wanted the sound to reinforce what it was the player was doing, however I did not simply want to map a sound effect to each action. Instead, I wanted to create a soundscape that reflects the player's progress. The title screen of the 1994 Squaresoft RPG Final Fantasy VI uses a track called "Omen" composed by Nobuo Uematsu to introduce the game. The mix of church organ and choir sounds like the sonic version of ascension into Heaven, however it is punctuated by a strident two-chord finale that feels like one had just entered Hell. (Regrettable, however, is the shoddy looping, as I had spent time editing the audio files at the sample level so as to get them to loop almost seemlessly without the audible gap.)

It felt like the perfect piece of music to represent Sisyphus's punishment, and so I recreated the composition and mapped the introduction of notes to his progress up the hill. Particularly humourous is the prompt that interrupts the player when reaching the summit: the music suddenly stops as the alert tells you there is nothing you can do but watch as the rock rolls back down the hill. You click OK, and that Hellish two-chord cacophony plays as you do nothing but helplessly watch as the rock rolls back down the hill (truly helpless: the buttons do nothing during this time).

I spent a lot of time on that final moment, making sure it was timed properly so as to feel "right" - as in soul-draining. A specific example of what I knew it needed was the number represented by distance travelled rapidly counting down: I wanted to take away everything you'd worked for, and I wanted you to watch it being taken away.

The visual element was mostly an after thought and implemented just so I could do something with p5. In the end, the way the rock rolls down after you click OK, with that music playing, is kind of hilarious. As mentioned, the original idea was text only, which is why I included the text log, but it seems somewhat unnecessary at this point. I had an idea of coming up with random flavour text that would be prepended or appended on the messages, eg. "And then, the rock slipped [...] much to Sisyphus's dismay" etc. so as to create a "Sisyphus story generator", which it still kind of is, if only extremely rudimentary.
